# MODEL2937159804: MODEL2937159804

## Installation

Download this repository, and install with distutils

`python setup.py install`

Or, install using pip

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/MODEL2937159804.git`

To install a specific version (in this example, from the 2014-09-16 BioModels release)

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/MODEL2937159804.git@20140916`


# Model Notes


Shimoni2009 - Escherichia Coli SOS

Simple model, involving only the basic components of the circuit, sufficient
to explain the peaks in the promoter activities of recA and lexA.

This model is described in the article:

[Stochastic analysis of the SOS response in Escherichia
coli.](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/19424504)

Shimoni Y, Altuvia S, Margalit H, Biham O

PloS one. 2009; 4(5):e5363

Abstract:

BACKGROUND: DNA damage in Escherichia coli evokes a response mechanism called
the SOS response. The genetic circuit of this mechanism includes the genes
recA and lexA, which regulate each other via a mixed feedback loop involving
transcriptional regulation and protein-protein interaction. Under normal
conditions, recA is transcriptionally repressed by LexA, which also functions
as an auto-repressor. In presence of DNA damage, RecA proteins recognize
stalled replication forks and participate in the DNA repair process. Under
these conditions, RecA marks LexA for fast degradation. Generally, such mixed
feedback loops are known to exhibit either bi-stability or a single steady
state. However, when the dynamics of the SOS system following DNA damage was
recently studied in single cells, ordered peaks were observed in the promoter
activity of both genes (Friedman et al., 2005, PLoS Biol. 3(7):e238). This
surprising phenomenon was masked in previous studies of cell populations.
Previous attempts to explain these results harnessed additional genes to the
system and deployed complex deterministic mathematical models that were only
partially successful in explaining the results.

PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we apply stochastic methods, which are better suited
for dynamic simulations of single cells. We show that a simple model,
involving only the basic components of the circuit, is sufficient to explain
the peaks in the promoter activities of recA and lexA. Notably, deterministic
simulations of the same model do not produce peaks in the promoter activities.

SIGNIFICANCE: We conclude that the double negative mixed feedback loop with
auto-repression accounts for the experimentally observed peaks in the promoter
activities. In addition to explaining the experimental results, this result
shows that including additional regulations in a mixed feedback loop may
dramatically change the dynamic functionality of this regulatory module.
Furthermore, our results suggests that stochastic fluctuations strongly affect
the qualitative behavior of important regulatory modules even under
biologically relevant conditions, thus emphasizing the importance of
stochastic analysis of regulatory circuits.

This model is hosted on [BioModels Database](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/)
and identified by:
[MODEL2937159804](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.db/MODEL2937159804).

To cite BioModels Database, please use: [BioModels Database: An enhanced,
curated and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic
models](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/20587024).

To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.


